<!--
Superscript: ⁰¹²³⁴⁵⁶⁷⁸⁹
Subscript:   ₀₁₂₃₄₅₆₇₈₉
Other: ≈ᵢ
-->


09/22/2020

# CSCI 310 - Advanced Algorithms

*Scribes: Collin Bauer, Alex Bailey*

---

*9:55 AM: lecture started*

## Exhausive Search and Introduction to Tree Search

Q: *What is exhausitve search?*
- search everything
- brute force approach

### Brute Force Algorithm - Revisit
- Straightforward approach
- often checks all possible answers - exhausitvely checks
- inefficient

Examples discussed so far:
- linear search
- travelling salesman
- bubble sort
- selection sort
- "string algorithm" (find substring pattern)

Q: *If an algorithm is O(n^2), what tipped you off?*
- Nested loops
- Summation
- *Note: Intuition helps find the order of growth, but to prove it, solve the summation.*

### Combinatorics and Optimization
- Mathematical problems dealing with combinations, permutations or optimizing parameters
- General problems seeking specific solutions
- BRUTE FORCE: generate *all* solutions, select the *best*

> Q: *How can I maximize my profite and minmize my loss?*  
> Z = max(x₁ + x₂ + x₃) &nbsp; &nbsp; where x₁, x₂, x₃ representes the number of each product  
> 0 <= x₁ < 100  
> 0 <= x₂ < 10000  
> 0 <= x₃ < 500
> 
> *Just by inspection...when will Z be maximum?*
> - when x₁ = 99; x₂ = 9999, x₃ = 499
>
> What about if we slightly change the problem?  
> Z = max(x₁ + x₂ - x₃)  
> - Now the optimized solution is x₁ = 99, x₂ = 9999, x₃ = 0


Many real-world problems reduce to combinatorial versions (e.g. routing, schedulting, logitical planning
- Combinatorial problems eeven show up on technical reviews.
- Two of today's problems represent a special class of problems: *NP-Hard*
  - NP-Hard problems have no known polynomial-time solution (i.e. O(n²)
  - Arguably the greatest open question in computing


### Traveling Salesperson Problem
- A salesman needs to visit n cities without repeating any.  
  What is the cheapest route?
- In mathematical terms: Given a weighted graph of n vertices, find a cycle that travels throughe every vertex exactly once.

*Ghosh demonstrated the salesperson problem to high schoolers with "balls" and "strings"*  
*This problem is heavily based in graph theory, and it gets infinitley more complicated with every "ball" added*

### Knapsack Problem
- A thief is choosing from a set of n objects, where each object has a value vᵢ and a weight wᵢ. With a knapsack capacity c, find the most valuable subset of objects.
- In mathematical terms: Given a set of n objects with value vᵢ and weight wᵢ and a maximum cpacity c, find the subset of object with the highest total value v and a total weight w < c.

*Should have brought a bigger sack.*

This problem actually has a polynomial solution O(n⁴)! Can you find it?

### Eight Queens Problem
- How many different ways can you arrange 8 queens without endangering any of them?
- 92 unique solutions
- How many different positions are there so that:
  - No two queesn are on the same square?
  - No two queesn are on the same row?
  - No two queesn are on the same row OR in the same column?

Q: *Is this an optimization or a combinatorics?*
- Combinatorics. Why?
- *It is not optimization because there is no function for maximization/minimization.*
- *It is combinatorics because you can represent the problem in graphs, and the rules can be represented as edges.*

### Exhaustive (Graph) Search
- Graphs are a very common construction in computer science
- Specially structured graphs called trees are a common way to store data
- How do we search graph vertices in an ordered fashion?
  - Breadth-First Search
  - Depth-First Search

> **Graphs in terms of nodes only or edges only**  
> Set of edges = {(n₁, n₂), (n₂, n₄), (n₃, n₁)} where n₁, n₂, n₃, n₄ are nodes  
> Directed or undirected graph

### Mathematical Graph
- A set of vertices and edges that connect them
- trees are graphs with no cycles (loops)
- Common representation
  - Adjacency matrix
  - Adjacency list

### Depth-First Search
- Search vertices by moving as far as possible from the starting node
- Produce a set of trees containing the searched vertices called a Depth-frist Search Forest
- Implemented with a stack (least in first out) data structure

*Why it is important*
- Methematical: graph connectiviety, acyclicity, etc.
- Foundation for iterative deepening tree search - Applications in SAT solving
- Often applied to AI search spaces (e.g., determining which move to make in chess, solving a maze)
- File Systems arranged as trees can be traversed using DFS-based Database algorithms


> *What is SAT?*  
> SAT = a V b V c, where a, b, c are Boolean values  
> | | | | | |
> |-|-|-|-|-|
> |0|0|0|=|0|
> |0|0|1|=|1|
> |0|1|0|=|1|
> |0|1|1|=|1|
> |1|0|0|=|1|
> |1|0|1|=|1|
> |1|1|0|=|1|
> |1|1|1|=|1|
>
> SAT = Satisfiability  
> a, b -> 4 cases  
> a, b, c -> 8 cases  
> a, b, c, d -> 16 cases  
> and so on...
>
> Satisfiability is built on boolean values, and allegedly implies a truth table...or something  
> *I got a little lost during this epxlanation.*

...

*10:55 AM - moved on from slides to talk about mathematical induction*

> Mathematical induction... So far, what we learned is
> - weak form of induction
> - strong form of induction
> 
> **Weak form**  
> Let P be predicate on non-negative integer if:
> - P(0) is true and
> - for all n ∈ ℕ, P(n) -> P(n+1)  
> -> P(m) is true for all m ∈ ℕ
> 
> **Strong form**  
> Let P be predicate on non-negative integer if:
> - P(0) is true and
> - for all n ∈ ℕ, P(0), P(1), ..., P(n)  
> -> P(m) is true for all m ∈ ℕ

...

*Something about Book of Proof by R. Hammack*

Read the following sections (from our usual book):
- 3.1
- 3.2
- 3.3
- 3.4