## MATH 250 - Statistical Methods I

Kumar

https://portal.mypearson.com/course-home

---

## Experimental Designs

In an **observational study**, researchers simply observe characteristics and take measurements.

In a **designed experiment**, researchers impose treatments and controls, then observe characteristics and take mearurments,

Observational studies can only reveal *association*, while designed experiments can help establish *causation*.

Example: ***Vasectomies and Prostate Cancer***
> One study found 113 cases of prostate cancer among 22,000 men who had a vasectomy. This compares to a rate of 70 cases per 22,000 among men who didn’t have a vasectomy.” The study shows about a 60% elevated risk of prostate cancer for men who have had a vasectomy, thereby revealing an association between vasectomy and prostate cancer. But does it establish causation: that having a vasectomy causes an increased risk of prostate cancer?
- No, because the study was observational.

Example: ***Folic Acid and Birth Defects***
> For the study, the doctors enrolled 4753 women prior to conception and divided them randomly into two groups. One group took daily multivitamins containing 0.8 mg of folic acid, whereas the other group received only trace elements (minute amounts of copper, manganese, zinc, and vitamin C). A drastic reduction in the rate of major birth defects occurred among the women who took folic acid: 13 per 1000, as compared to 23 per 1000 for those women who did not take folic acid.
- This study helps establish causation.

---

# Chapter 2

### Variable types
- Qualatative
- Quantitative
  - Discrete
  - Continuous

<br/>

## Qualatiative data

### Frequency Distributions

***Procedure: contruct a freequency distribution of qualitative data***
1. List the distinct values of the observations in the data set in the first column of a table
2. For each oberservation,
3. ?
4. ?

### Relative Frequency
A **relative frequency** distribution...

***Procedure:***

*Fill in the gaps once he posts the Chapter 2 slides on Oaks*

### Pie Charts
A **pie chart** is...

***Procedure: Construct a pie chart***
1. Obtain a relative-frequency distribution of the data by applying the relative frequency 
2. Divide a disk into wedge-shaped pieces propoprtional to the relative frequencies
3. Label the slices witht he distinct values and their relative frequencies

### Bar Charts
A **bar chart** displays the *distinct values* of the qualitative data on a horizontal axis an dthe *relative frequencies* of those values on the vertical axis. The relative frquency of each distinct value is represented by a vertical bar whose height is equal to the relative frequency of that value. The bars should be positioned so that they do not touch each other.

*Weird distinction.*

***Procedure: Construct a bar chart***
1. Obtain a relative frequency idstribution of the data
2. Draw a horizontal axis on which to place the bars and avertical axis on which to display relative frequencies
3. 
4. 

<br/>

## Quantitative Data

### Limit grouping
- **Lower class limit**: the smallest value that oculd go in a class
- **Upper class limit**: The largest values that could go in a class
- **Class width**: The diffrerence between the lower limit of a class and the lower limit of the next higher class
- **Class mark**: The average of the two class limits of a class